Tencent Hy
Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context
Sparse Attention
Siran Liu,
Yang Xue,
Theo Tang,
Changxu Shao,
Qian Cheng,
Haimeng Ren,
Donghua Jiang
Haipeng Ming,
Lehua Ding,
Zhonghan Lin,
Shengying Wei,
Wei Liu∗,
Kai Liu,
Jianchen Zhu
Tencent Inc.
https://github.com/Tencent/hpc-ops
sethranliu@tencent.com, reedlauliu@tencent.com
Abstract
Sparse attention bounds downstream attention work by retaining a fixed-size subset of
indexed tokens, but its standalone exact Top-K stage must still process materialized score
rows whose length grows with context. Production radix selectors discover their first
actionable boundary only after a complete-row pass, forcing another row-scale traversal
before exact refinement. We observe that locating a compact upper tail requires sub-
stantially less resolution than identifying the exact rank boundary, and that fixed-stride
partial views of the current row remain calibrated to the corresponding complete-row
rank across ragged lengths. We present HPC-Ops Top-K, a sample-guided exact selector
for ragged sparse-attention score rows. A fixed-stride view proposes a row-local coarse
boundary; the mandatory complete-row pass certifies its sufficiency, forms the admitted
candidate set, and initializes exact FP32 refinement over the unresolved frontier. A nested
secondary boundary and exact recovery handle underfilled proposals before any output
is committed, so sampling controls common-path work but never correctness. The GPU
implementation fuses complete-row certification and candidate formation, and combines
persistent, KV-split, and direct-exact execution behind graph-capturable ragged-row dis-
patch. We evaluate HPC-Ops Top-K on indexer scores from Hy4-Preview. It outperforms
the fastest verified external exact baseline by 1.29–1.75× across 20 operator configurations,
with a 1.55× geometric-mean speedup. It further achieves 1.36× and 1.48× speedups
on two framework-derived sparse-attention traces. The implementation is available in
HPC-Ops, Tencent’s open-source high-performance operator library for LLM inference, at
https://github.com/Tencent/hpc-ops.
1
Introduction
Long-context inference increases both KV-cache traffic and the cost of determining which tokens each query
should attend to. Sparse attention bounds the subsequent attention work by retaining a fixed-size subset of
the indexed context. In indexer-based designs such as DeepSeek Sparse Attention (DeepSeek-AI, 2025), an
indexer materializes an FP32 relevance-score row for each query, exact Top-K identifies the selected positions,
and the main attention accesses only the corresponding keys and values. Fixing K bounds the downstream
attention work, but it does not bound selection: every score row must still be examined over its full valid
length. At hundreds of thousands of indexed tokens and many ragged rows per invocation, exact Top-K can
therefore remain on the critical path even after the surrounding kernels have been optimized.
The central cost is not the unavoidable inspection of an unsorted row, but when an exact selector obtains a
boundary that can reduce the active set. Production radix selection first streams the complete row into a digit
histogram; only the completed histogram reveals the bucket containing rank K. Scores encountered before
∗Correspondence to: Wei Liu.
– 1 –
arXiv:2609.08450v1  [cs.DC]  8 Sep 2026


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
the histogram completes cannot be classified on their first encounter, so candidate formation requires another
row-scale traversal before exact refinement. Other exact GPU selectors maintain ordered state, partition or
reduce the row, or predict boundaries from prior invocations (Shanbhag et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2025; Gaihre et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2026). These mechanisms trade row traffic for
ordered work, resident state, data-dependent intermediate sets, or reusable history. Closing this gap requires a
current-row boundary before the complete-row pass, together with exact semantics, regular GPU execution,
ragged-row support, CUDA-Graph capture, and score traffic close to one complete-row scan.
Our key insight is that early reduction does not require the resolution of exact selection. Two findings support
this separation. First, a large boundary error can leave only a compact upper tail: distinguishing the value at
rank K from its immediate neighbor can demand an extremely precise cutoff, whereas substantially coarser
boundaries still leave compact upper tails across the captured score rows. Second, fixed-stride views track
global upper-tail quantiles across ragged lengths without relying on prior invocations. Finite-population order
statistics explain this position-agnostic baseline, while the endpoint structure observed in sparse-attention
scores further reduces the estimation error. Together, these findings make the current row itself a low-cost
source of an early boundary while leaving the unavoidable complete-row pass authoritative for exactness.
We use this separation to build HPC-Ops Top-K, a three-phase sample-guided exact selector. Phase 1 reads
a fixed-stride view and proposes a row-local coarse boundary. Phase 2 applies that boundary during the
mandatory complete-row traversal, certifies the sufficiency of the admitted candidate set, persists the admitted
candidates, and constructs the leading histogram for exact refinement on their first encounter. If the proposal
underfills, a nested secondary boundary and, when necessary, exact coarse recovery establish a sufficient
candidate set before any output is committed. Phase 3 performs exact FP32 radix refinement only over the
compact certified frontier, committing resolved digit groups and carrying only the unresolved boundary frontier
forward. Sampling therefore controls common-path work but never determines the returned indices. With
sampling stride s, the proposal reads approximately L/s scores before the required complete-row traversal,
rather than introducing another row-scale boundary-localization pass.
The GPU implementation realizes the sampled pipeline within a shape-dependent portfolio of exact kernels.
The fused complete-row pass uses vectorized score reads while performing boundary classification, candidate
collection, and construction of the leading exact histogram in one traversal. Subsequent refinement carries
forward only the unresolved frontier rather than revisiting resolved scores. Persistent kernels keep each
row and its compact state under one CTA, KV-split kernels expose parallelism across a few long rows, and
direct-exact kernels cover complementary shapes for which sampling does not amortize. These paths share
graph-stable ragged-row dispatch and the same exact FP32 refinement contract.
We evaluate HPC-Ops Top-K on indexer scores from Hy4-Preview (Tencent Hy Team, 2026) against verified
exact Top-K implementations from vLLM, TensorRT-LLM, SGLang, FlashInfer, and PyTorch (Kwon et al.,
2023; NVIDIA Corporation, 2026b; Zheng et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2025; Paszke et al., 2019). HPC-Ops Top-K
is fastest in all 20 evaluated operator configurations, outperforming the fastest external baseline by 1.29–
1.75× with a 1.55× geometric-mean speedup. On two framework-derived sparse-attention traces, it achieves
1.36× and 1.48× speedups. The implementation is released as part of HPC-Ops, Tencent’s open-source
high-performance operator library for LLM inference, at https://github.com/Tencent/hpc-ops.
Our contributions are:
• Workload insight. We identify and analyze the separation between locating a compact upper tail and
resolving its exact rank boundary, and show that fixed-stride views of the current row can locate a useful
coarse boundary across ragged lengths.
• Sample-guided exact selection. We develop a three-phase proposal–certification–refinement algorithm
in which sampling reduces common-path work while complete-row certification, bounded recovery, and
exact FP32 refinement preserve exact Top-K semantics.
• GPU realization and validation. We realize the design through fused complete-row processing and a
graph-stable dispatcher over persistent, KV-split, and direct-exact kernels, bringing the principal sampled
path close to the one-scan traffic floor. We validate the resulting operator at both operator and framework
levels and release it as part of the open-source HPC-Ops library.
– 2 –


Tencent Hy
2
Background
2.1
Cost of Standalone Top-K Selection
Sparse-attention models decide which key–value entries each query may attend to by ranking a score vector.
In indexer-based designs such as DeepSeek Sparse Attention (DeepSeek-AI, 2025), GLM-5.3 (Z.ai, 2026),
and Hy4-Preview (Tencent Hy Team, 2026), a lightweight indexer scores every historical token against the
current query,
ℓt =
h
X
j=1
wj · ReLU
 qt,j K⊤
,
(1)
and the selector keeps the K positions with the largest scores. The downstream sparse attention consumes
those indices, not the scores.
Two properties of this arrangement set up the rest of the report. The score matrix is materialized before
selection, so the selector is a standalone operator over an existing array. And its cost scales with context length
while the attention behind it does not.
Operator contract.
The operator maps a materialized score matrix and a per-row valid length to K indices
per row:
X ∈RM×N
|
{z
}
float32
,
e ∈NM
| {z }
valid lengths
7−→I ∈ZM×K
|
{z
}
int32
.
Here M is the number of score rows and N is their allocated, possibly padded width. Row r has valid length
Lr := er ≤N, valid positions [Lr] := {0, . . . , Lr −1}, and scores xr,i := Xr,i for i ∈[Lr]. For a single-row
argument, we omit r and write L, [L], and xi. When Lr > K, the operator returns K distinct indices from
[Lr]. For Lr ≤K, row r instead contains every valid index, and any remaining slots j ∈{Lr, . . . , K −1}
are filled with the sentinel Ir,j = −1; the downstream sparse-attention operator skips those entries. Selection
is exact when no unselected valid element of a row exceeds any selected one. Ties at rank K leave the index
set underdetermined, so the contract fixes the selected values rather than a particular index permutation. Inputs
are float32 and free of NaN; ±∞and subnormals are ordered numerically.
Deployment requirements.
Four properties of the serving path decide whether a selector can be dropped
into it, and they later exclude designs that are otherwise attractive. Rows are ragged: under causal masking
within a prefill chunk, Lr varies widely, so a schedule that assigns equal work per row is unbalanced. Rows
are stored at a padded pitch whose alignment, not the logical length, determines the vector width a kernel may
use. The operator must be capturable in a CUDA graph, which forbids reading a runtime statistic back to the
host to choose a code path (NVIDIA Corporation, 2026a), and its workspace must be bounded independently
of the batch. It must accept scores from any producer, and it must be replayable offline on a saved score matrix
so that numerical regressions in a deep model remain tractable.
Why long rows are expensive.
Once the indexer has materialized a score row, the selector must cover its L
valid entries, whereas downstream sparse attention consumes only the K selected positions. We compare the
selector’s row-scaled score traffic with the selected-position payload of sparse attention. Let bs be the bytes per
materialized score, and let ba be the logical bytes consumed by sparse attention per selected position, including
its index and model-specific cached attention state. For the selector, let Wscore count logical global-memory
score reads over the valid row: complete traversals and any row fraction revisited before reduction reaches
a compact candidate frontier. The resulting row-equivalent traffic is Req := Wscore/L, while subsequent
exact refinement contributes candidate-scale work. The corresponding score-read traffic and selected-position
payload are then
Bscan = ReqLbs,
Bsparse = Kba.
(2)
Their ratio exposes the relevant scaling law:
Bscan
Bsparse
= Reqbs
ba
L
K .
(3)
– 3 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
For fixed K and data representations, this ratio grows linearly with L; each additional complete-row traversal
increases it in the same proportion.
The standalone exact-selection contract also imposes a traffic floor. An arbitrary unsorted row cannot be
certified without inspecting every valid score, so
Req ≥1
for any exact selector.
(4)
Each complete global traversal of the valid row contributes 1, while revisiting a fraction of the row contributes
the same fraction. Values reused from registers or shared memory add no global score read. Once the row
has been reduced to a compact frontier, its exact work is accounted for separately. Thus Req = 1 denotes one
complete scan without another row-scaled revisit. For fixed K, bs, and ba, Req is the selector-controlled factor
in eq. (3), which makes it the traffic axis used to compare the mechanisms in section 2.2.
2.2
Approaches to Exact Selection
The textbook task is to return the K largest entries of a row; GPU selectors differ in how they obtain the
boundary needed for that result. Figure 1 groups exact mechanisms by whether they maintain ordered state,
discover a boundary through current-row partitioning, reduce the row before an exact backend, or predict a
boundary from prior invocations. A separate body of work reduces the same system cost by moving selection
into score production, sharing indexing work across queries or layers, or relocating sparse-attention data and
execution; section 7 covers it.
Exact Top-K
on a materialized
row
Order
maintenance
Full sort
torch.sort+prefix
Bounded ordered state
bitonic Top-K (Shanbhag et al., 2018);
GridSelect (Zhang et al., 2023)
Boundary-dependent
partitioning
Radix / bucket select
torch.topk; AIR (Zhang et al., 2023);
RadiK (Li et al., 2024)
On-chip threshold search
RTop-K (Xie et al., 2025)
Reduction
before exact
selection
Delegate reduction
Dr. Top-k (Gaihre et al., 2021)
Sampled reduction
SampleSelect (Ribizel & Anzt, 2019, 2020);
Qrita (Park et al., 2026); HPC-Ops
History-dependent
prediction
Temporal prediction
GVR (Cheng et al., 2026)
Figure 1: Mechanisms for exact Top-K selection over a materialized score row. The leaves name representative
GPU realisations. The four branches organize the survey; table 1 then distills their seven mechanisms into
deployment-facing cost and execution categories. HPC-Ops belongs to sampled reduction; methods that alter
the score producer or the sparsity contract are covered separately in section 7.
For deployment, however, the algorithmic labels are not enough. The decisive question is what information
each mechanism makes available before or during the mandatory inspection of a long row, and what resource
or signal it exchanges for lower complete-row traffic. We examine the mechanisms in turn and then use table 1
to synthesize their representative work, score traffic, GPU execution, and sensitivity to the input data.
Order-maintaining selection.
Sorting the row and keeping a prefix costs log L traversals, and none of that
work reflects that only K elements are wanted. Bitonic Top-K removes most of it by discarding the losing half
after each merge stage (Shanbhag et al., 2018), and GridSelect maintains a grid-wide bounded queue whose
insertion position is computed with a warp ballot, so the expensive sort and merge run only when the queue
fills (Zhang et al., 2023). Both attain Req = 1, which is the floor of eq. (4).
What they pay for it is a footprint. The retained structure lives in shared memory and registers, which caps the
rank at 256 for a bitonic network and 2048 for a warp- or grid-level queue (Zhang et al., 2023). The O(log2 K)
cost of the merge network compounds this: by the same authors’ measurement a queue is faster only below
K ≈256, above which radix partitioning wins on identical hardware (Zhang et al., 2023). Reaching the
one-scan traffic floor through bounded ordered state therefore does not remove its rank-scaling limitation.
– 4 –


Tencent Hy
Boundary-dependent partitioning.
Radix and bucket selection build a histogram over successive digits of
an order-preserving key, locate the bin holding the Kth element, and refine within it, giving Drad iterations
for a key processed by a Drad-digit schedule. AIR and RadiK are representative GPU realisations (Zhang
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024); the CUDA path of torch.topk uses the same radix-selection family (PyTorch
Contributors, 2026).
Radix exposes regular SIMD work, and its later active ranges can shrink sharply once a boundary bin is known.
Its initial cost, however, is fixed by boundary timing: a conventional path spends one complete traversal
locating the first boundary and another classifying the row against it, so Req ≥2 before later active-range
work is considered. Section 2.3 traces the CUDA dependency that makes this reread structural and explains
which later passes round fusion can overlap.
Its dependability is the other side of the same coin: no input makes it wrong, and skew costs traffic rather than
correctness. Adversarially clustered keys that share leading bits eliminate nothing in the early iterations, and
the mitigation chooses between re-reading the row and spilling a candidate buffer according to which moves
fewer bytes (Zhang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). This bounds the cost of skew rather than removing it.
A numeric threshold search reaches the same result differently, testing candidate thresholds and counting
qualifying elements with warp ballots (Xie et al., 2025). Loading the row into shared memory once and
iterating on chip attains Req = 1, and the published evaluation covers rows of a few hundred to a few thousand
elements. That prerequisite is the constraint rather than the iteration count: the evaluated rows fit in CTA-local
shared memory, whereas the long sparse-attention rows considered here do not. Once the row spills, each of
the O(log L) search rounds becomes a global traversal.
Reduction before exact selection.
Spending a little work to shrink what an exact backend must examine
can keep complete-row traffic near the one-scan floor without requiring the row to remain on chip. Unlike the
preceding mechanisms, its excess work is governed by the size of an intermediate reduction rather than by a
structurally required full-row reread. Dr. Top-k partitions the row and uses per-partition delegates to prove that
whole partitions cannot contribute (Gaihre et al., 2021). The bound never fails, but the subrange width that
controls it has an interior optimum: a wider subrange shrinks the delegate set and enlarges the second stage
that must then be concatenated. The saving therefore rests on a constant tuned to the data rather than on a
property of the row.
Sampling obtains its reduction signal from the current row. SampleSelect estimates splitters from a sample
and partitions the full input exactly (Ribizel & Anzt, 2019, 2020), while Qrita fits a sampled tail model
before narrowing the quantile with a multi-pivot search (Park et al., 2026). Prof-K uses a random sample to
size a one-pass filter and recovers the exact Top-K with user-specified high probability (Dziarmaga et al.,
2026). SampleSelect and Qrita retain deterministic exact completion through full-row verification; Prof-K
instead adopts a probabilistic correctness contract. Exactness alone, however, does not determine whether
the reduction repays its sampling work. On long, ragged sparse-attention rows, the decisive quantity is the
candidate volume left by a sublinear per-row view: a useful estimate must reduce the exact backend to a
compact, O(K)-scale tail rather than another row-scale problem.
History-dependent prediction.
Consecutive decode steps produce strongly correlated scores, so the previous
step’s selection is an excellent initial threshold. GVR uses that guess to initialize a full-row secant threshold
search and then refines exactly. Across its reported DSA decode layers, Phase 2 averages 1.1–2.7 threshold-
search iterations (Cheng et al., 2026). The guess is strong enough that Phase 2 approaches a single threshold-
search traversal on high-correlation layers, making the approach highly effective on decode-shaped work.
Its prerequisite, though, is a property of the schedule rather than of the data, and cannot be supplied when
absent. There is no previous step at the first chunk of a prefill, on a single offline call, or when replaying a saved
score matrix, and on those calls the approach falls back to the partitioning path and inherits its multi-pass traffic.
Full-row counting remains unavoidable: the prior initializes the search but each threshold is checked against
the current row, and candidate formation adds another traversal. With nsearch threshold-search traversals, its
row-scaled traffic therefore satisfies Req ≥nsearch + 1 even when the initial proposal is strong.
Table 1 compares the mechanisms along four deployment-relevant dimensions. The GPU-mapping column
identifies the dominant execution structure rather than measured speed. Data sensitivity describes how much
the executed work changes with score distribution or proposal quality at fixed L and K: low denotes a largely
fixed schedule, moderate data-dependent candidate or refinement work, and high a fast path governed by the
– 5 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
initial boundary estimate. Because every mechanism retains exact completion, this grade concerns performance
rather than correctness.
Table 1: Deployment-facing comparison of the mechanisms in fig. 1 over one valid row. Work is representative
rather than an implementation-level bound; Req reports row-scaled global score traffic, normalized by one
complete valid-row read; compact candidate-only exact work remains explicit in the Work column. All rows
denote exact-completion mechanisms.
Mechanism
Representative row work
Req
GPU mapping
Data sensitivity
Full ordering
O(L log L)
log L
General-purpose
Low
Bounded ordered state
O(L log2 K)
1
Rank-limited
Low
Radix / bucket select
O(DradL)
≥2
Strong SIMD
Low–Moderate
On-chip threshold search
O(nthrL)
1
Capacity-limited
Moderate
Delegate reduction
O(L + Ddel
√
LK)
1 + fdel
Two-stage
Moderate
Sampled reduction
O(Lsamp + L + Wcand)
1 + Lsamp/L
Strong SIMD
Moderate
Temporal prediction
O((nsearch+1)L + Wcand)
nsearch + 1
Strong SIMD
High
Drad, Ddel, nthr, and nsearch count radix, delegate-refinement, on-chip threshold-search, and temporal threshold-search
rounds; fdel is the row fraction revisited after delegate filtering; Lsamp is the aggregate sample size; and Wcand is
candidate-only exact work after row-scale reduction.
What the landscape leaves open.
Taken together, the survey and table 1 expose a common tradeoff.
Order-maintaining and on-chip methods exchange score traffic for excess ordering work or resident state;
reduction methods exchange it for a data-dependent intermediate set; temporal prediction exchanges it for
prior invocation state. Production radix avoids these capacity and history prerequisites and retains regular
GPU execution, but pays an initial full-row reread.
The missing combination is therefore long-row support, regular GPU execution, current-row state, and
score traffic near one valid-row scan. Sampled reduction has the appropriate information source, but the
retained-tail size of a sublinear view at the target rank is the unresolved property. The next subsection isolates
why production radix obtains its first boundary too late to close this gap; section 3 then evaluates whether
current-row views supply the required compact tail.
2.3
The Production Radix Bottleneck
Production radix provides self-contained, regular GPU execution, but its gap from the one-scan floor is set by
when the rank boundary becomes available. Its pass count is not merely the number of digits in the key; it
follows from a CUDA data dependency between histogram construction and boundary-dependent classification.
Figure 2 separates this structural dependency from the execution pressure within each pass.
Structural traffic.
The first pass contributes every key to an on-chip digit histogram, and only the completed
bin counts allow a prefix scan to expose the bucket containing rank K. The scores streamed through the CTA
before that point cannot yet be classified by the resulting boundary. The implementation must therefore touch
the row again or retain a row-sized copy. Round fusion overlaps each boundary classification with the next
digit histogram, reducing the worst-case score reads of a four-digit schedule from 8L to 5L (Zhang et al.,
2023). On well-spread keys, an 11-bit digit also shrinks later active ranges far below L. Neither effect can
fuse classification into the initial pass that creates the first boundary, so its histogram–classification pair still
contributes 2L reads before candidate shrinkage can help.
– 6 –


Tencent Hy
Conventional production radix
four-digit round-fused schedule
Req ≤5 (≤5L reads)
Pass 1
L reads
FP32
score row
L ordered keys
Digit histogram
2048 bins
in SMEM
atomic updates
Prefix + locate
CUB scan
CTA barrier
boundary available
Pass 2
L rereads
same
score row
read from
GMEM again
Classify + compact
test against
boundary
collect counters
candidate
tail
retained
indices
initial L-value reread
Later
digits
active range
shrinks with
each digit
filter + next
histogram
round fusion
lower-bit
refinement
exact K indices
Structural traffic
boundary after Pass 1 ⇒initial L-value reread
Per-pass pressure
SMEM atomics • CTA barrier • compaction
One-pass target
boundary before scan →verify + collect →tail-only exact refinement
Figure 2: Why production radix selection rereads the score row. The first histogram consumes all L keys
before the rank boundary exists; classification therefore rereads the materialized row. Later round fusion can
overlap work only after that boundary exists. The lower ledger separates this structural dependency from
atomics and synchronization that determine the throughput of each pass, and states the execution ordering
investigated in section 3.
Execution pressure.
Each full-row histogram maps L keys onto shared-memory bin counters, followed
by a CTA-wide prefix scan and barrier; classification then funnels qualifying elements through compaction
counters. The production path therefore combines repeated score processing with shared-memory atomic
contention and synchronization (Cheng et al., 2026). Digit width, bin layout, and counter aggregation can
improve the throughput of these stages, but they do not move the first boundary earlier and cannot remove
the structural reread. This distinction makes full-row traversals the stable cross-implementation axis, while
atomics and barriers explain why the cost of each traversal remains architecture-sensitive.
The production bottleneck is therefore one of boundary timing: approaching the one-scan floor requires an
actionable upper-tail boundary before the mandatory row inspection, without relaxing the deployment contract
of section 2.1. Section 3 tests whether production score rows supply the required coarse localization, and
section 4 turns the resulting evidence into an exact selector.
3
Motivation
3.1
Empirical Observations
Exact Top-K selection must resolve the precise Kth boundary, whereas an early filtering boundary need only
retain a compact superset of the answer. This distinction raises two workload questions: how much boundary
error can be tolerated before the retained tail ceases to be compact, and whether a regular partial view can
locate that tail across ragged score rows.
We answer these questions using indexer scores produced by Hy4-Preview (Tencent Hy Team, 2026) and
captured immediately after the indexer MQA and before Top-K selection. The measurements use K = 2048.
Each capture materializes a batch of these FP32 score rows immediately before selection. For row r, we
analyze the valid vector xr = (xr,0, . . . , xr,Lr−1). When one row is clear from context, we omit r and write
x = (x0, . . . , xL−1). Three captures span multiple indexer layers and prefill chunks, with maximum valid
lengths of 65,536, 131,072, and 244,650. In each capture, we retain rows with Lr ≥4K, so every row
supports a common upper-tail range, and select 4,096 rows at equal spacing from the eligible set. We preserve
their causal lengths and rank all valid FP32 values, so every quantity below is an exact order statistic of the
operator input.
– 7 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
Observation 1: large boundary error can leave only a compact upper tail.
Ordinary subscripts continue
to identify positions. To distinguish ranks from positions, let x↓
(j) denote the j-th largest value, so x↓
(1) ≥· · · ≥
x↓
(L). An exact selector must ultimately distinguish x↓
(K) from x↓
(K+1). A coarse boundary has a different task:
it need only retain a manageable upper tail that contains the final answer. We measure the accuracy–work
relation directly. Let δ = x↓
(K) −x↓
(K+1) be the adjacent score gap demanded by exact selection. We move
the boundary downward by ϵ such gaps and count the complete-row values it retains:
θ(ϵ) = x↓
(K) −ϵδ,
C(ϵ) = #{i ∈[L] : xi ≥θ(ϵ)}.
(5)
Here ϵ measures boundary error in units of the exact adjacent gap. C(ϵ) is the exact number of complete-row
values at or above θ(ϵ), namely the upper-tail size that remains after applying this coarse boundary. Together
they expose the accuracy–work frontier: ϵ controls boundary imprecision, and C(ϵ) records its cost in values
that remain to be resolved.
Adjacent-gap normalization requires δ > 0, so rows tied at the Kth boundary are omitted from this sweep.
Figure 3a varies ϵ over four orders of magnitude. A boundary displaced by 100× the exact gap still retains
a median of 1.03K values, and 95% of rows retain no more than 1.15K. At 500×, the median is 1.18K
and the 95th percentile is 2.02K. The curve eventually bends upward, making the cost of excessive error
visible, but its long flat region is the important separation: score precision can be relaxed by hundreds of
adjacent-boundary gaps before retained work grows by the same scale. All three captures show the same
flat-then-rising profile, so this tolerance persists across the measured sequence lengths rather than appearing
only at one favorable length.
The reason is local rank geometry. One exact gap spans one adjacent pair, whereas lowering a boundary through
many comparable gaps advances through many ranks. Under a smooth local score density, a displacement
of ϵδ adds approximately ϵ values, not a factor of ϵ in retained work. Section 3.2 states this approximation
precisely. The experiment therefore identifies a broad target: a useful early signal need not approximate the
exact cutoff; it need only land within the flat part of the score-error/work curve.
Observation 2: regular partial views recover global upper-tail quantiles.
The first observation supplies
tolerance but not a cheap source of global information. We next ask whether regularly spaced positions
preserve the complete-row upper-tail quantiles. For a period s, positions with the same residue modulo s form
one phase, and each phase reads approximately a 1/s fraction of the row. For a requested complete-row rank
eK, let q = ⌈eK/s⌉be the corresponding sample rank. In phase a, we take its q-th largest value and write Ja(q)
for that value’s exact rank in the complete row. A calibrated view therefore satisfies Ja(q) ≈eK.
We sweep five fractions from 1/16 through 1/256, five requested ranks from K through 2K, and every phase
of the selected rows. In fig. 3b, their median complete-row ranks follow the requested-rank diagonal throughout
the sweep. Even the smallest 1/256 view remains within 5% of every requested rank, while views through
1/64 remain within 1.3%.
The median curves establish calibration but do not hide its uncertainty. The two distribution glyphs in the
same panel show the central shape and median, while their capped spines expose the fifth-to-95th-percentile
range at requested rank 1.5K: 1/64 views span 1.23K–1.77K, while 1/128 views span 1.09K–1.92K. Their
medians remain within 0.03K of the request, and the full uncensored distributions place 95% of absolute
errors within 0.32K and 0.50K, respectively. The partial views are therefore globally centered, while their
remaining dispersion stays on the same O(K) scale as the compact tail identified by Observation 1.
This representativeness has a position-agnostic basis. If global ranks are exchangeable over positions, each
phase is a uniform finite-row sample and its order statistic is centered near the requested global rank. The
exchangeable curve in panel (d) evaluates the corresponding finite-population RMS error at every measured
causal length; this reference already predicts useful calibration for all five view sizes.
The captured rows supply additional empirical margin. Across the three captures, the first and last position
deciles contain 52–74% of exact top-K indices, compared with 20% under uniform positions (panel (c)). These
endpoint-structured captured rows exhibit 14–28% lower RMS rank error than the exchangeable reference at
every measured view size (panel (d)). Thus regular partial views work in the general position-agnostic case,
and the structured real inputs are easier still. The endpoint geometry itself is consistent with prior attention-sink
and recency analyses (Xiao et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2025; Barbero et al., 2025).
– 8 –


Tencent Hy
Together, the measurements establish both the tolerance available to a coarse boundary and a low-cost source
of global rank information. The next subsection gives these two empirical relations a theoretical basis.
1×
10×
100×
1K×
10K×
boundary error / exact score gap
K
2K
4K
10K
40K
100K
values retained, C(ε)
K--2K: compact tail
(a) Coarse precision keeps a compact tail
median
95th percentile
500× score error
median 1.18K  |  95% ≤2.02K
K
1.25K
1.5K
1.75K
2K
global rank requested, ̃K
K
1.25K
1.5K
1.75K
2K
complete-row rank measured, J
J =̃ K
(b) Partial views remain globally centered
fraction read
1/16
1/32
1/64
1/128
1/256
requested ̃K = 1.5K
5th--median--95th
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
absolute position decile (causal prefix)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
share of exact top-K indices
first + last deciles
52--74% of exact top-K
uniform positions: 20% at the two endpoints
sink side
recent side
(c) Captured tails cluster at endpoints
N = 64K
N = 128K
N = 245K
1/16
1/32
1/64
1/128
1/256
fraction of row read by one phase
0.1K
0.2K
0.3K
0.4K
global-rank error (RMS)
14--28% lower error
smaller view ⟶
(d) Endpoint structure lowers rank error
exchangeable reference
endpoint-structured captures
Figure 3: Method-independent evidence that a regular partial view provides a useful coarse upper-tail locator.
(a) Complete-row work after lowering the exact boundary by ϵ adjacent score gaps; the shading extends from
the exact K floor to the 95th percentile. (b) Median measured rank follows the requested global rank for five
read fractions; the two distribution glyphs combine the observed central shape, median, and fifth-to-95th-
percentile range for 1/64 and 1/128 views at 1.5K. (c) Exact top-K indices in all three captures concentrate
in the first and last absolute position deciles, the broad endpoint geometry associated with sink and recency
regions. (d) At requested rank 1.5K, endpoint-structured captured rows have 14–28% lower RMS rank error
than the exact position-exchangeable reference across all five read fractions.
3.2
Theoretical Basis
The observations expose two distinct resolutions. In value space, the issue is how a score displacement around
the exact boundary translates into additional retained ranks. In position space, the issue is how an order statistic
from a regular partial view maps back to the complete row. Local and finite-population order statistics make
both relations explicit, while contiguous-interval arithmetic explains the additional margin supplied by the
observed endpoint structure.
Local order statistics produce the flat cost region.
Let F be a smooth local approximation to a row’s
score distribution, f its density, and ξ(u) = F −1(1 −u) its upper quantile function. Using x↓
(j) ≈ξ(j/L), a
first-order expansion around rank K gives (David & Nagaraja, 2003)
δ = x↓
(K) −x↓
(K+1) ≈
1
Lf(x↓
(K))
,
x↓
(K) −x↓
(C) ≈
C −K
Lf(x↓
(K))
.
(6)
– 9 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
For C = C(ϵ), the threshold definition in eq. (5) implies x↓
(C) ≥θ(ϵ) > x↓
(C+1). Thus ϵδ lies between the
score displacements to ranks C and C + 1. Applying the two local-spacing approximations yields, up to this
one-rank discretization,
C(ϵ) −K ≈ϵ.
(7)
The unknown local density and row length cancel. At ϵ = 500, for example, the relation predicts a tail near
K + 500 ≈1.24K, close to the measured 1.18K median. The empirical ribbon then captures the remaining
variation in local score geometry. This rank-scale interpretation explains the flat opening of fig. 3a: hundreds
of exact score gaps add hundreds of values to an existing K-sized tail, rather than multiplying its size by
hundreds.
Exchangeability supplies the position-agnostic baseline.
For a valid row of length L, phase a contains
na ∈{⌊L/s⌋, ⌈L/s⌉} positions. Under positional exchangeability it is a uniform na-subset of the global rank
order. The complete-row rank Ja(q) of its q-th largest value is a finite-population order statistic (O’Neill,
2025; David & Nagaraja, 2003) with
E[Ja(q)] = q(L + 1)
na + 1
≈qs ≈eK,
Var[Ja(q)] = q(na −q + 1)(L + 1)(L −na)
(na + 1)2(na + 2)
.
(8)
Because na ≈L/s and q = ⌈eK/s⌉, the expectation reduces to the requested global rank up to
the one-sample rounding margin, giving the diagonal in fig. 3b.
The RMS error around that request
is
q
Var[Ja(q)] + (E[Ja(q)] −eK)2, so the exact reference retains both the finite-row variance and the
small rounding bias. Ignoring these edge effects when L ≫eK, the variance reduces to approximately
eK(s −1)(1 −eK/L); shrinking the view therefore increases uncertainty only at a square-root rate. Evaluating
the exact expression for every measured causal length and both possible phase sizes produces the exchangeable
RMS reference in panel (d), rather than a curve fitted to the measurements.
Contiguous boundary regions distribute themselves across phases.
For any contiguous boundary region
B ⊆[L] of m positions,
#{i ∈B : i mod s = a} ∈
njm
s
k
,
lm
s
mo
.
(9)
Writing m = ℓs + ν with 0 ≤ν < s makes the balance explicit: every residue occurs ℓtimes in the region
and exactly ν residues occur once more. Hence counts across phases differ by at most one. When elevated
upper-tail probability extends across broad endpoint regions, as measured in fig. 3c, every phase receives
nearly the same number of opportunities to observe it. This shared coverage can suppress phase-to-phase
rank dispersion; a tail locked to one residue instead creates the classical systematic-sampling alias (Bellhouse,
1988). The interval identity therefore supplies the geometric mechanism behind the measured reduction, while
panel (d) measures its magnitude.
3.3
Design Implications
The evidence supports a coarse-to-exact decomposition. Observation 1 shows that locating a compact upper
tail requires far less score resolution than identifying the final Kth boundary. Observation 2 shows that a
regular partial view supplies a globally centered estimate at precisely this coarser rank scale, with the observed
endpoint structure adding margin rather than defining the applicability of the estimate. An early estimator
should therefore be judged by the work it leaves for exact resolution, not by whether it reproduces the final
cutoff.
This division assigns the two stages different responsibilities. The partial view provides an early boundary
with enough global context to organize the upper tail. The complete-row stage remains authoritative: it sees
every valid value, verifies that the retained tail is sufficient, and leaves the final ordering to an exact operation
over that compact set. Sampling error can change the amount of retained work, but the complete-row check
prevents it from changing the final output.
The decomposition supplies the early boundary required by section 2.3. The mandatory pass can classify
and collect values on their first encounter, while subsequent exact work remains confined to the upper tail.
Section 4 develops this principle into a sample-guided exact selector.
– 10 –


Tencent Hy
4
Method
4.1
Algorithm Overview
Consider one valid score row x = (x0, . . . , xL−1) ∈RL, with L > K. Rows are selected independently, so
the three phases below operate on this row. HPC-Ops separates boundary proposal from exact selection. Phase 1
reads a regular partial view and proposes a row-local coarse boundary. Phase 2 performs the authoritative
complete-row traversal, using that boundary to persist candidates, count them, and construct the first exact
histogram on their first encounter. Phase 3 consumes that histogram, commits resolved digit prefixes, and
carries only the unique boundary group through the remaining FP32 digits. An underfilled proposal may first
expand through a bounded secondary boundary before exact coarse recovery; rows without a usable view enter
exact coarse recovery directly.
Phase 1
Coarse boundary
localization
row-local view
Vr,s →histogram
provisional τ0
and nested τ1
Phase 2
Fused validation + formation
one complete-row scan →
A(τ0), C(τ0)
bh0(·; τ0)
Phase 3
Exact radix refinement
Qj →bj by digit prefix
commit Rj; retain Qj+1
propose τ0
(E0, Q0, k0, h0)
C(τ0) ≥K
Bounded band extension
append A(τ1) \ A(τ0)
Exact coarse recovery
rebuild boundary
from all L values
certified interface
(E0, Q0, k0, h0)
C(τ0) < K
enough
still short
no usable view
Sampled execution mappings
same phases and invariant; different exposed parallelism
Persistent one CTA per row
Phase 1
locate τ0
Phase 2
scan row
Phase 3
Qj →
Qj+1
phase state remains local; independent rows
are taken in completion order
KV-split for a few long rows
split Phase 2
Phase 1
locate τ0
scan Ω0
scan Ω1
scan ΩP −1
merge
U
p Ap
P
p Cp(τ)
P
p bh0,p
Phase 3
radix
refine
row-local boundary • disjoint scans • additive merge • one finisher
Figure 4: The sample-guided exact-selection pipeline and its two sampled execution mappings. The upper
path separates boundary proposal, complete-row certification, and exact FP32 refinement; an underfilled
proposal expands through a precomputed band and otherwise enters an exact coarse recovery. Phase 2 converts
either a certified proposal histogram or an exact coarse recovery into the common (E0, Q0, k0, h0) refinement
interface. In Phase 3, each digit commits strictly better groups and advances only the unique boundary group.
The lower path maps the same phases either to one CTA per row or to a row-local boundary, partitioned
validation, additive merging, and one-finisher refinement for KV-split execution.
This organization lets the mandatory complete-row pass validate the proposed boundary and form its admitted
tail together. The partial view determines how much work remains, whereas the complete row and the FP32
refinement determine the returned indices.
Every route entering Phase 3 produces the same initialization (E0, Q0, k0, h0): a committed prefix, one
unresolved frontier, the remaining quota, and the frontier’s leading-digit histogram. Its certified admitted state
is S0 := E0 ⊎Q0 ⊆[L], satisfying
|S0| ≥K,
i ∈S0, j /∈S0
=⇒
xi ≥xj.
(10)
The boundary construction guarantees the ordering relation, and the complete-row count establishes its
sufficiency. Exact refinement does not order this state wholesale. At each FP32 digit, it commits every group
strictly ahead of the rank boundary and carries only the unique boundary group to the next digit. A conservative
proposal therefore changes only the initial refinement volume; an underfilled proposal is detected before any
output is committed.
– 11 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
Figure 4 summarizes the logical pipeline and its two sampled execution mappings. The three phases preserve
the same certified-state invariant whether one CTA owns a row or several CTAs partition its complete-row
traversal.
4.2
Phase 1: Coarse Boundary Localization
Phase 1 locates its boundary in an inexpensive coarse ordering. Let fp16(x) denote round-to-nearest FP16
projection, and let κ↓
16(x) be the descending sortable key of that projection, so a larger projected value receives
a smaller integer key. Grouping adjacent keys by their 11 most significant bits gives
c(x) =
$
κ↓
16(x)
25
%
∈{0, . . . , Bc −1},
Bc = 211.
(11)
This coarse map is monotone and many-to-one:
xi > xj
=⇒
c(xi) ≤c(xj).
(12)
A larger score may share a bin with a smaller one but cannot enter a worse bin. Phase 3 later resolves the order
within each coarse bin from the original FP32 values.
Across rows, we distribute the regular views with a balanced deterministic phase schedule. Let πs be a fixed
permutation of the s residue classes and assign row r the phase ar = πs(r mod s). For its valid length Lr,
the locator reads
Vr,s = {i ∈[Lr] : i ≡ar
(mod s)}.
(13)
Every block of s rows consequently uses each phase once. This removes a dataset-wide preference for any one
residue class while preserving regular, deterministic access within a row. It also allows cooperating execution
units to reconstruct the same view from row identity alone. The view contains approximately Lr/s values,
enough to expose an upper-tail order statistic while remaining a fraction of one complete traversal.
The sampled values form a coarse-key histogram and inclusive prefix count
hr,s(b) =
X
i∈Vr,s
1[c(xr,i) = b],
Hr,s(b) =
b
X
v=0
hr,s(v).
(14)
Localization targets the same complete-row rank used in Observation 2. Let eK = ρK, where ρ > 1 supplies a
compact retention margin, and request sample rank q = ⌈eK/s⌉. The provisional boundary for row r is the
first coarse bin whose prefix contains that sample rank,
τ0,r = min{b : Hr,s(b) ≥q}.
(15)
Each row therefore derives its own bin threshold τ0,r while sharing the same global-rank target. The relationship
in sections 3.1 and 3.2 explains why the resulting boundary rank is centered near eK, rather than growing
with Lr. We choose eK = 1.5K in the evaluated configuration, within the compact O(K) tail established by
Observation 1 and the rank range evaluated by Observation 2. The margin favors a compact superset over a
boundary that stops at exactly rank K.
A deeper target eK1 > eK may be recorded during the same prefix scan, with q1 = ⌈eK1/s⌉and τ1,r ≥τ0,r. The
primary boundary defines the common path; the secondary boundary remains dormant unless the complete-row
count exposes an underfilled proposal. Both boundaries come from the same histogram, so this recovery
margin requires neither a denser view nor another sample traversal. Phase 1 therefore returns a row-local
primary boundary and, when enabled, a nested recovery boundary. The row subscript is omitted from τ0 and
τ1 below when the row is clear; rows whose views cannot support the requested sample rank enter the exact
route directly.
These row-local boundaries determine the downstream candidate volume and whether secondary or exact
recovery is needed. Phase 2 materializes the corresponding admitted region over all valid scores and certifies
its sufficiency; Phase 3 resolves the exact FP32 order.
– 12 –


Tencent Hy
4.3
Phase 2: Fused Validation and Candidate Formation
For a coarse threshold τ, define its admitted upper tail and size as
A(τ) = {i ∈[L] : c(xi) ≤τ},
C(τ) = |A(τ)|.
(16)
Because c is monotone, the admitted prefix c(x) ≤τ forms a contiguous upper tail in FP32 score space. Its
cutoff is the smallest FP32 value admitted by that prefix. The inclusive boundary admits an entire coarse bin,
so reduced precision may enlarge the retained tail but cannot cut through that bin. This C(τ) is the algorithmic
counterpart of C(ϵ) in eq. (5): both denote retained complete-row work, with their arguments identifying how
the threshold is chosen.
Lemma 4.1 (Validated Top-K Containment). If C(τ) ≥K, then A(τ) contains a Top-K solution for x.
Proof. For any admitted i and excluded j, c(xi) ≤τ < c(xj). If xj > xi, the monotonicity in eq. (12) would
require c(xj) ≤c(xi), a contradiction. Hence every admitted value is no smaller than every excluded value.
Because the complete boundary bin is admitted, the K largest values inside A(τ) form a valid exact Top-K
solution.
For exact refinement, let κ↓
32(x) be the descending sortable key of the original FP32 score. We partition its 32
bits into D = 3 digits of widths 11 + 11 + 10 and write digj(κ↓
32(x)) for digit j. Before the complete-row
traversal, Phase 2 converts τ0 once to this FP32 cutoff. It then compares the original FP32 scores directly
against the cutoff while materializing A(τ0), storing its indices, and measuring C(τ0). On the same encounter,
each admitted FP32 value contributes to a proposal histogram over the leading exact digit, producing
bh0(b; τ0) =
X
i∈A(τ0)
1[dig0(κ↓
32(xi)) = b].
(17)
The hat records that this histogram belongs to a proposed admitted tail; the unadorned h0 is reserved below
for the certified frontier passed to Phase 3. The pass therefore produces a persisted admitted tail A(τ0), its
containment certificate C(τ0), and its leading exact-digit histogram. On the primary path this tail becomes the
initial FP32 refinement frontier. Candidate formation and the proposal histogram are fused because they inspect
the same admitted values. Unlike the conventional path in fig. 2, no complete traversal is spent discovering a
boundary that can only be used after the row has passed; the provisional boundary already exists when the
scan starts.
If C(τ0) = K, the certified tail is already the answer; if C(τ0) > K, it becomes the initial FP32 refinement
frontier. Estimation error on the loose side increases C and hence refinement work, while error on the tight
side is detected as underfill.
Underfilled views.
When C(τ0) < K, the nested boundary from Phase 1 permits a bounded recovery before
rebuilding an exact boundary. A second scan appends only the band
∆A = A(τ1) \ A(τ0) = {i : τ0 < c(xi) ≤τ1}
(18)
and extends the proposal histogram by
bh0(b; τ1) = bh0(b; τ0) +
X
i∈∆A
1[dig0(κ↓
32(xi)) = b].
(19)
The enlarged set is certified by the same complete-row count. Once sufficient, A(τ1) replaces A(τ0) as the
initial refinement frontier; only continued underfill invokes exact coarse recovery. The secondary threshold
therefore provides a bounded expansion of the candidate superset without changing the exact-selection
criterion.
If no secondary boundary is enabled, or if the enlarged set remains underfilled, the selector enters exact coarse
recovery. It builds the coarse histogram over all L values and identifies τ⋆= min{b : C(b) ≥K} as the
exact coarse boundary. A subsequent traversal commits every bin strictly ahead of τ⋆, retains the complete
boundary bin, discards the remaining bins, and constructs the leading exact-digit histogram only over that
retained frontier. The resulting initialization is
E0 = {i : c(xi) < τ⋆}, Q0 = {i : c(xi) = τ⋆}, k0 = K −|E0|, h0(b) =
X
i∈Q0
1[dig0(κ↓
32(xi)) = b]. (20)
– 13 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
Consequently, every route that requires refinement supplies (E0, Q0, k0, h0) with the same semantics. A
certified sampled route sets
E0 = ∅,
Q0 = A(τ),
k0 = K,
h0(·) = bh0(·; τ),
(21)
where τ ∈{τ0, τ1} is the boundary whose tail passed validation; exact coarse recovery supplies eq. (20). In
both cases, S0 = E0 ⊎Q0 satisfies eq. (10). This route-independent tuple is the interface between validation
and refinement.
4.4
Phase 3: Exact Radix Refinement
Phase 3 consumes (E0, Q0, k0, h0). At the beginning of round j ∈{0, . . . , D −1}, Ej contains the committed
indices, Qj is the unique unresolved frontier, and kj = K −|Ej| is the remaining quota. Its histogram and
inclusive prefix are
hj(b) =
X
i∈Qj
1[digj(κ↓
32(xi)) = b],
Hj(b) =
b
X
v=0
hj(v).
(22)
Because smaller ordered keys denote larger FP32 values, the boundary digit is the first bin whose prefix
reaches the remaining quota:
bj = min{b : Hj(b) ≥kj}.
(23)
Equivalently, Hj(bj −1) < kj ≤Hj(bj), with Hj(−1) = 0. Thus every digit group before bj is part of the
result, while the rank boundary lies inside bj. The newly committed group is
Rj = {i ∈Qj : digj(κ↓
32(xi)) < bj}.
(24)
Every index in Rj is irrevocably selected, every group after bj is discarded, and only the boundary group
remains unresolved:
Ej+1 = Ej ⊎Rj,
Qj+1 = {i ∈Qj : digj(κ↓
32(xi)) = bj},
kj+1 = kj −|Rj|.
(25)
While classifying Qj, the algorithm retains Qj+1 and builds its next-digit histogram. The next round therefore
inspects only the unique boundary group rather than the complete admitted tail or score row, following a
prefix–commit–retain pattern at every digit. Section 5.4 describes the physical buffering of these frontiers.
After all D digits, candidates in QD have identical FP32 ordered keys. Phase 3 fills the remaining kD slots
from that group. This returns exactly K indices while leaving the choice among equal-valued boundary
positions unspecified under the operator’s tie semantics.
Theorem 4.2 (End-to-End Exactness). For every admissible row with L > K, the algorithm returns K distinct
valid indices satisfying the exact Top-K contract of section 2.1.
Proof sketch. Phase 2 either certifies a sampled admitted tail by lemma 4.1 or constructs a sufficient committed-
prefix–plus–frontier state with the exact coarse route. Equations (23)–(25) then commit every strictly better
group while preserving enough indices in the unique boundary frontier to fill the remaining quota. The D = 3
digits exhaust the FP32 ordered key; selecting the remaining indices from the final equal-key group produces
K distinct valid indices, completing the exact Top-K output.
The proof isolates the role of reduced precision: the FP16 key bounds candidate membership, but it never
resolves the final order. Exactness is supplied by complete-row certification, exact FP32 refinement, and the
sample-independent recovery path.
4.5
Execution Mappings
For the sampled path, the three logical phases admit two GPU mappings, chosen according to the row-level
parallelism exposed by the call. Both appear in the lower half of fig. 4 and preserve the same certification and
refinement invariants.
– 14 –


Tencent Hy
Persistent one CTA per row.
When the call contains enough rows, one CTA executes Phases 1–3 for a
row and retains phase-local histograms, candidate indices, and the selected prefix across the pipeline. Rows
remain mutually independent, so a persistent pool can take them in completion order and absorb variation in
valid length and candidate volume. This mapping minimizes coordination: the only complete-row work is the
Phase 2 scan on a certified sample path, while every exact radix round stays local to the CTA’s frontier state.
KV-split mapping.
For a small number of long rows, row-level parallelism leaves most of the GPU idle
during the mandatory scan. We partition [L] into P disjoint contiguous segments Ω0, . . . , ΩP −1. The
deterministic view lets every participant reconstruct the same row-local boundary, after which the CTAs
partition Phase 2 across disjoint segments, producing
Ap(τ) = A(τ) ∩Ωp,
Cp(τ) = |Ap(τ)|,
bh0,p(b; τ) =
X
i∈Ap(τ)
1[dig0(κ↓
32(xi)) = b].
(26)
Because the segments do not overlap, their outputs compose exactly:
A(τ) =
P −1
]
p=0
Ap(τ),
C(τ) =
P −1
X
p=0
Cp(τ),
bh0(b; τ) =
P −1
X
p=0
bh0,p(b; τ).
(27)
After all segments publish their local state, one finisher reduces eq. (27), compacts the disjoint candidate
ranges, certifies the aggregate, and initializes the same (E0, Q0, k0, h0) interface used by the one-CTA path.
An underfilled aggregate enters the same recovery logic. KV-split therefore changes the parallel span of the
complete-row validation, not the admitted tail or the selection semantics. The next subsection quantifies the
row-level work and reduced validation span introduced by this mapping.
4.6
Complexity Analysis
On the certified sampled path, Phase 1 reads approximately L/s scores, Phase 2 reads all L scores once, and
Phase 3 reads only the successively shrinking boundary frontiers. Per row, the work is therefore
Θ

L
s + L +
D−1
X
j=0
|Qj| + K

,
D = 3.
(28)
The first two terms describe fixed-coverage passes over the input row: a regular 1/s view costing L/s and
one complete certification-and-candidate pass costing L. The frontier sum accounts for exact work over
successively retained sets and therefore depends on the realized boundary, while the final K term writes the
output. Exactness still requires the complete L-value pass.
Table 2: Score-row traffic before frontier-only FP32 refinement. A band attempt and the exact coarse recovery
each add only after the preceding candidate set underfills; all routes terminate with the same certified-state
invariant.
Route
Score reads
Initial FP32 frontier
Certified primary boundary
(1 + 1/s)L
admitted tail A(τ0)
Certified after band extension
(2 + 1/s)L
expanded tail A(τ1)
Exact recovery, no band attempted
(3 + 1/s)L
boundary bin; better bins committed
Exact recovery after failed band
(4 + 1/s)L
boundary bin; better bins committed
Direct-exact route
2L
boundary bin; better bins committed
Before frontier-only refinement, the certified path contributes Req = 1 + 1/s, replacing the second row-scale
traversal identified in section 2.3 with a fractional view.
Under the row-scaled traffic normalization of section 2.1, let pband be the probability of attempting the
secondary band and pexact the probability of ultimately entering exact coarse recovery. For the persistent
one-CTA sampled route,
E[Req] = 1 + 1
s + pband + 2pexact,
(29)
– 15 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
while the frontier term P
j |Qj| remains explicit in the complete work of eq. (28). Observed behavior on the
target workload bears out this amortization: primary underfill is rare, and the secondary boundary makes exact
recovery rarer still. Section 6.4 reports the measured pband and pexact. Rows certified by the primary boundary
incur neither the secondary scan nor the exact-recovery passes.
KV-split exchanges additional aggregate sample work for a shorter validation span. Each of the P segment
CTAs reconstructs the same L/s regular view, so the primary row-scaled traffic is Req = 1 + P/s; their
disjoint Phase 2 segments still cover the row exactly once and reduce the critical validation span from L to
approximately L/P. For bounded P, the per-row asymptotic work remains that of eq. (28), followed by
a compact histogram reduction and the same frontier work on the finisher. The mapping therefore targets
occupancy at small row counts rather than reducing aggregate work.
Finally, the correctness argument is rank-general. For a different K, the coarse target eK, its sample rank,
candidate budget, and the choice between sampled and direct-exact routes must be recalibrated for efficiency;
lemma 4.1, the full-row certificate, and the exact refinement recurrence do not change. The implementation
constants in section 5.5 specialize this general construction to the ranks and row shapes of section 2.1. Section 5
also develops the persistent task schedule, finisher election, storage lifetimes, and shape-stable dispatch that
realize both execution mappings.
5
Implementation
5.1
Implementation Overview
HPC-Ops realizes the three phases of section 4 as a family of exact GPU kernels. Its portfolio centers on the
sampled long-row pipeline, realized through persistent and KV-split execution, while row-local and eight-CTA
direct-exact kernels cover complementary shape regimes.
These kernels differ in how row work and intermediate state are owned. Persistent execution keeps an entire
row under one CTA; KV-split execution partitions its complete-row work and combines compact segment
state. Row-local exact execution constructs exact coarse state within one wider CTA, whereas the eight-CTA
cluster constructs that state cooperatively. Every path then enters the same FP32 refinement interface, using a
common ordered-key layout, commit–retain recurrence, and output procedure. A shape-stable planner selects
the mapping from captured dimensions.
The implementation discussion follows the sampled path through three CUDA concerns. Section 5.2 maps
regular-view access and coarse localization onto registers and reusable shared state; section 5.3 develops
the vectorized complete-row path, fused candidate storage, and recovery traffic; and section 5.4 follows the
compact frontier’s storage lifetime across exact digits. Section 5.5 then specifies CTA ownership, coordination,
and dispatch across captured shapes.
5.2
Phase 1: On-Chip Boundary Localization
The sampled kernels realize the row-phased regular view of section 4.2 with standard and wide-row policies
that use different constant strides. For row r, a CTA derives offset ar from the row identity and streams the
corresponding view Vr,s without lookup state. This row-dependent phase distributes consecutive rows across
sampling offsets while preserving regular address generation within each row. The resulting prefix locates the
primary boundary τ0 at the rank specified in section 4.2; the wide-row policy also retains the deeper recovery
boundary τ1 from the same prefix. Under KV-split, every segment CTA reconstructs the same row-local view
from ar, so boundary state need not be produced by a designated CTA or broadcast across the group.
Each sampled score moves directly from global memory into a register, where it is projected once to the
11-bit coarse key c(xi). Shared-memory atomic increments accumulate these keys in the 2,048-bin histogram
hr,s, and an in-place CTA prefix produces Hr,s and locates τ0 and, when enabled, τ1. A designated thread
converts the selected bins to their inclusive FP32 endpoints and publishes the resulting shared scalars. The
same histogram allocation is then cleared for the leading exact-digit histogram in Phase 2. The row remains in
global memory between the sampled accesses and the complete-row pass: registers hold the sampled operands
in flight, while shared memory retains only the histogram, prefix state, and endpoints. The first column of
fig. 5 exposes this residency and reuse.
– 16 –


Tencent Hy
A view is usable only when it reaches its largest requested rank: |Vr,s| ≥q for a primary-only policy
and |Vr,s| ≥q1 when the recovery boundary is enabled. Otherwise, the CTA uses the same coarse-key
representation, shared histogram, and in-place prefix to localize an exact coarse boundary from all Lr valid
scores. The sampled path passes one or two proposal endpoints to full-row validation; the exact route passes
the complete-row coarse boundary and its prefix state to the classifier, which emits bins ahead of the boundary
and materializes only its boundary-bin frontier. Both routes expose compact boundary state to the common
FP32 refinement interface.
PERSISTENT SAMPLED EXECUTION
PHASE 1 Boundary
PHASE 2 Validation
PHASE 3 Refinement
GLOBAL
MEMORY
REGISTERS
SHARED
MEMORY
FP32 score row
x = (x0, . . . , xL−1)
FP32 score row x
candidate spill buffer
FP32 score row x
ping-pong spill; output [0:K)
sampled score xi
coarse key c(xi)
current/next float4
FP32 cutoff predicate
frontier item (i, xi)
select / drop / retain by digit
coarse histogram hr,s
prefix Hr,s
boundary bins
τ0; optional τ1
admitted indices A(τ)
count C(τ); proposal bh0
histogram hj →hj+1
frontier Qj →Qj+1
quota kj →kj+1
strided sampled load
histogram atomicAdd
128-bit ld.global.cg
candidate append
count/histogram atomicAdd
gather i ∈Qj
frontier append
histogram atomicAdd
FP32 cutoff
reuse
Q0, h0
overflow
SCORE-ROW READS BY PHASE
PHASE 1: L/s
PHASE 2: L
PHASE 3: PD−1
j=0 |Qj|
REUSED 2,048-BIN HISTOGRAM
same shared allocation: hr,s →bh0/h0 →h1 →h2
Figure 5: GPU state residency and memory operations in persistent sampled execution. Columns trace
boundary construction, full-row validation, and frontier refinement; rows separate global-memory, register,
and shared-memory state. Vertical arrows identify load, append, and atomic-update paths, whereas horizontal
arrows pass the FP32 cutoff and certified frontier while recycling the shared histogram allocation. Phase 2
combines 128-bit cache-global loads with candidate and leading-histogram construction. Phase 3 gathers only
unresolved frontier indices, with surviving overflow continuing through global ping-pong buffers. The lower
ledgers summarize per-phase score reads and the lifetime of the reused 2,048-bin histogram.
5.3
Phase 2: Fused Full-Row Validation
Phase 1 hands validation the inclusive FP32 endpoint represented by the selected coarse bin. The CTA
broadcasts its value through shared memory and retains both the value and its bit pattern while streaming the
row. Comparing each original FP32 score directly with this endpoint reproduces the selected coarse prefix,
including its boundary value. Coarse-key projection is therefore confined to boundary construction and exact
coarse recovery rather than repeated in the bandwidth-dominant complete-row pass.
Aligned rows are fetched with 128-bit cache-global loads (ld.global.cg.v4.f32); two-wide and scalar paths
cover less aligned layouts and the valid-row tail. In the wide-row single-CTA specialization, every thread keeps
the current pair of float4 vectors in registers while issuing the next pair. Classification and shared-memory
updates consume the current values as the following loads are in flight, overlapping memory latency and
address generation with the collective work.
The loop fuses endpoint classification, candidate formation, and construction of the leading exact-digit
histogram. For every admitted score, an atomicAdd on the admitted count reserves its candidate position; the
same encounter stores the original row index and contributes the score’s leading ordered-key digit to the shared
histogram. Indices first occupy the CTA-resident candidate array and continue into its global overflow slice
when that array fills. Candidate storage, the realized count, and the leading histogram consequently describe
the same tail and proceed to refinement without a separate candidate or histogram pass.
After the traversal, the admitted count selects the continuation. A sufficient primary tail reuses the candidate
workspace and histogram already produced by the fused loop. On underfill, the wide-row policy repeats the
vectorized traversal but appends only the value band newly admitted by τ1; continued underfill enters exact
– 17 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
coarse localization. The principal path therefore incurs one complete-row traversal, while additional row traffic
is confined to recovery.
5.4
Phase 3: Frontier-Only Radix Refinement
Phase 2 leaves the initial frontier Q0 and its leading exact-digit histogram h0 in CTA-owned state. The
11+11+10 ordered-key partition lets every refinement round reuse one 2,048-bin shared allocation. A round
prefixes the current histogram in place and identifies the boundary digit. Once that prefix has been consumed,
the CTA clears the allocation and repopulates it with the next histogram during classification. The same storage
thus advances from hj to hj+1 without rebuilding histogram state from the complete row.
Two shared arrays of 32-bit row indices physically represent the current and next frontiers. In round j, threads
gather scores only for i ∈Qj, form the required ordered-key digit in registers, and route each index to the
output, the discarded suffix, or the surviving boundary group. An atomic reservation appends a surviving
index to the opposite array while shared-memory increments construct its next-digit histogram; the two arrays
then exchange roles. Consequently, an FP32 score is gathered again only while its index remains unresolved.
Direct-exact mappings can instead retain compact (index, ordered key) pairs on chip and refine their resident
keys without another score load.
Two global ping-pong slices extend the shared frontier when its resident capacity is exceeded. Resident and
spilled entries pass through the same digit classifier, and only surviving overflow is written to the opposite
slice. Under persistent execution, each worker CTA owns these slices and reuses them across the rows it later
claims, so the spill workspace scales with the bounded worker pool rather than the batch size. Cooperative
mappings receive segment- or row-owned slices from the same precomputed workspace contract. The global
continuation therefore changes state residency, not the refinement procedure.
5.5
Execution Mappings and Dispatch
HPC-Ops maps each captured shape to an execution organization that balances grid-level occupancy against
inter-CTA coordination. Its sampled mappings cover long rows through either persistent row ownership or
partitioned validation, while row-local and eight-CTA direct-exact kernels cover complementary shape regimes.
Figure 6 organizes these mappings by captured row capacity M and allocated row width N, and exposes their
CTA ownership. Within the sampled long-row regime, abundant rows favor persistent execution, whereas
lower row-level concurrency favors KV-split. For direct-exact execution, a grid of wider per-row CTAs avoids
peer coordination when it can sustain occupancy; only a few long rows instead favor an eight-CTA cluster.
Inter-CTA cooperation is therefore introduced where the work per captured row can amortize it.
Static execution map
CTA organization within each mapping
larger captured row width N
more captured rows M
Row-local
exact CTA
per row
Persistent sampled
one CTA
per row
Sampled KV-split
2/4/8 segment
CTAs
Eight-CTA
exact cluster
per row
Persistent sampled
one owner per row
Sampled KV-split
F
2/4/8 segment CTAs • F merges
Row-local exact
CTA
one wide CTA • no peer reduction
Eight-CTA exact cluster
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
eight CTAs • rank 0 refines via DSM
Figure 6: Static execution mapping and CTA organization. The left panel maps captured row capacity M
and allocated row width N to the primary mapping; the qualitative regions also depend on device capability.
The right cards show one owner per row for persistent sampled execution, segment CTAs and a last-arriving
finisher F for KV-split, one wide CTA for row-local exact execution, and eight clustered CTAs whose rank 0
refines DSM-shared state.
– 18 –


Tencent Hy
Persistent sampled.
When the call exposes enough independent rows to occupy the device, one 512-thread
CTA owns the complete state of a row. Keeping the row within one CTA removes inter-CTA coordination from
the common sampled path. The first scheduling wave assigns one row directly to each CTA; CTAs that finish
this wave claim remaining rows from a device counter. Direct first-wave assignment avoids queue traffic for
modest calls, while completion-order claiming balances large ragged batches. The sampled histogram, FP32
endpoint, candidate frontier, and exact histograms remain CTA-owned across all three stages; frontier overflow
changes residency without introducing a peer owner. The stride-64 and stride-128 views are compile-time
policies of this common body.
Sampled KV-split.
For sampled long-row shapes with limited row-level concurrency, the complete-row
scan dominates while a one-CTA-per-row grid leaves the device underoccupied. Two, four, or eight CTAs
therefore process disjoint contiguous row segments. Each CTA reconstructs the same row-phased regular view
and hence the same sampled endpoint proposal; this small replicated view is amortized by the much longer
segment scan. During the complete-row stage, a CTA writes a private candidate range, candidate count, and
leading exact-digit histogram for its segment. The aggregate validation scan still covers every valid score
exactly once, while its parallel span falls with the number of participating CTAs.
Each segment publishes its state before incrementing a row-local arrival counter. The last-arriving CTA
becomes the finisher, reduces the fixed-width histograms, compacts the segment candidate ranges, and
evaluates the aggregate count. A sufficient aggregate enters frontier refinement on the finisher; an underfilled
aggregate enters the exact coarse route. The split count is selected as part of the launch geometry, while the
finisher exposes the same logical row-level selection state to refinement as the one-CTA mapping.
Row-local exact.
When one wide block provides sufficient per-row parallelism, row-local ownership avoids
the coordination cost of a cooperative mapping. A 1024-thread CTA constructs the exact coarse boundary and
completes selection with row-local state. The short-row specialization keeps several aligned score vectors
in registers across boundary construction and classification, carrying the loaded values into the exact path
without materializing a row-sized candidate workspace. The longer-row specialization streams scores under
the same row-local ownership, using either direct row assignment or a bounded worker schedule according to
the captured row count. Both variants retain compact exact boundary state on chip and reuse the common
three-digit FP32 refinement.
Eight-CTA exact cluster.
When only a few long rows are available, even a wide row-local CTA leaves
insufficient blocks to fill the device. An eight-CTA hardware cluster converts row length into intra-row
parallelism by assigning one contiguous segment to each CTA. The CTAs first construct disjoint exact coarse
histograms and combine them through distributed shared memory. Once the common coarse boundary is
known, each CTA rescans its segment and publishes the definitely selected prefix and boundary-bin candidates.
Rank 0 owns FP32 frontier refinement and directly traverses the compact DSM-resident state, while peer CTAs
publish disjoint selected ranges and keep their distributed state live until row output is complete. The mapping
turns coarse localization and boundary classification into intra-row parallel work, then leaves only the reduced
frontier under one owner for fine-grained refinement.
Shape-stable dispatch.
One host planner realizes this execution map before graph capture from the captured
rank, row capacity, padded width, row pitch, and device capability. It fixes the kernel family, view density,
KV-split count, and workspace contract behind a single entry point; the same plan drives workspace sizing,
while a persistent direct-exact body supplies a shape-compatible fallback when sampling is not selected or
a cooperative launch cannot be formed. The live row count and per-row valid lengths remain device inputs,
so capture and replay preserve launch geometry, queue counters, split state, and spill ownership without
allocation, host readback, or data-dependent relaunch; persistent counters are restored on device.
– 19 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
6
Evaluation
We evaluate exact Top-K selection from standalone operator scaling to framework-derived long-context traces
and score-and-select integration. We first measure how performance changes with rows per call and allocated
row width, then quantify whether the gains persist under native scheduling and score-matrix workspace
partitioning. Policy and mechanism ablations finally identify the source of the gain and the row shapes for
which sampled localization is effective.
6.1
Experimental Setup
Experimental environment.
We evaluate HPC-Ops Top-K on NVIDIA H20 GPUs using FP32 indexer
scores produced by Hy4-Preview (Tencent Hy Team, 2026) and captured immediately before selection. The
evaluated standalone operator uses K = 2048 and preserves the native ragged row lengths. Table 3 summarizes
the hardware and software environment.
Table 3: Evaluation environment. CUTLASS Python DSL is used by the TensorRT-LLM CuTe kernels.
Component
Configuration
GPU
NVIDIA H20 (78 SMs, 96 GiB)
Selection
Top-K
Score tensor
FP32
CUDA runtime
12.8
PyTorch
2.11.0+cu128
CUTLASS Python DSL
4.5.0
Timing protocol.
We measure GPU device time with CUDA events on the execution stream. After the
workload-specific warmup and conditioning schedule, repeated CUDA-Graph measurements produce the
per-call median. The timed region contains operator execution; input preparation, allocation, reference
construction, correctness checks, and one-time compilation are excluded. The terminal-step parameter and
complete-step mechanism controls use 10 warmups, two conditioning sweeps of 50 replays, and seven rotated
rounds that each average 100 replays. The crossover sweep uses 10 warmups and seven rotated 100-replay
rounds, while the score-and-select integration check uses eight warmups, two 25-replay conditioning sweeps,
and seven 50-replay rounds. Trace- and step-level latency is the sum of the corresponding per-call medians.
Exactness criterion.
For the operator, framework, and terminal-step experiments, we validate every returned
row under the set-valued exactness contract. Its indices must be distinct and lie in the valid prefix [Lr]. For
Lr > K, a set Sr is exact when |Sr| = K and
min
i∈Sr xr,i ≥
max
j∈[Lr]\Sr xr,j,
(30)
with arbitrary choices permitted among values tied at the boundary. When Lr ≤K, the result must contain
every valid index and use the contract sentinel for the remaining output slots. The criterion accepts any valid
choice among boundary ties without imposing output order or a floating-point tolerance. Latency ratios use
exact executions; invalid results, illegal accesses, and out-of-memory outcomes are reported separately. The
score-and-select integration applies the same criterion to verified rows from every constituent call.
Implementations.
We evaluate the production entry of HPC-Ops and the closest available exact implemen-
tations from five external families:
• HPC-Ops. We invoke hpc.topk with its production workspace and internal shape dispatch. We use
commit f39028d.
• vLLM. We evaluate two upstream sampler entries (Kwon et al., 2023). Prefill uses top_k_per_row_
prefill; decode uses top_k_per_row_decode with next_n=1. We use commit c5d840f.
– 20 –


Tencent Hy
• TensorRT-LLM. We evaluate cute_dsl_topk_prefill_wrapper with both REREAD and GMEM-SPILL
overflow policies (NVIDIA Corporation, 2026b). Its decode path invokes cute_dsl_radix_filter_topk_
wrapper; the eight-CTA path invokes cute_dsl_radix_filter_topk_single_pass_multi_cta_wrapper.
We use commit f5cbe6b.
• SGLang. We evaluate the JIT Top-K V2 path (Zheng et al., 2024) topk_transform_512_v2, with metadata
produced by plan_topk_v2. We use commit 155aa26.
• FlashInfer. We evaluate flashinfer.top_k (Ye et al., 2025) with automatic algorithm selection and
sorted=False. We use commit 56ed540.
• PyTorch. We evaluate torch.topk (Paszke et al., 2019) with largest=True and sorted=False as the
generic dense selector. We use commit 70d99e9.
All implementations operate on the same valid FP32 score prefixes. Native variable-length interfaces consume
the original row lengths directly. For dense-only interfaces, a full-suffix-mask adapter sets every invalid
suffix position to negative infinity before timing while preserving the original row count, allocated width, and
invocation boundaries.
6.2
Operator-Level Top-K Performance
We first isolate the two dimensions that determine the dominant score traffic: the rows per call and their
allocated width. The matrix combines M ∈{512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192} with four terminal widths of 128K,
256K, 512K, and approximately 1M elements. All inputs are unchanged scores from the Hy4-Preview captures.
For each width N, we retain its final 8192 consecutive causal rows, so their valid prefixes span the final 8192
context lengths ending at N. Consecutive non-overlapping groups form the smaller values of M, so the sweep
changes launch occupancy and aggregate work without replacing or rescaling the score distribution.
Every implementation receives the same full-width FP32 tensor for a given shape. Invalid causal suffixes
are set to negative infinity before timing; length-aware implementations additionally receive the original row
lengths. The latency of a shape is the median over all groups and repeated executions. For each external
implementation family, we retain its fastest entry point that passes eq. (30) at that shape, and compare HPC-Ops
with the fastest of these family-level results.
HPC-Ops passes exact verification and is fastest in all 20 configurations. Its advantage over the best exact
external result is 1.29–1.42× at 128K columns, 1.49–1.53× at 256K, 1.60–1.72× at 512K, and 1.68–1.75×
at 1M, for a geometric mean of 1.55× over the matrix. SGLang supplies the best-exact result in 18 of the
20 shapes; TensorRT-LLM decode supplies the other two at M = 512 on the longest widths. The gain is
comparatively stable across M at a fixed width, but widens as N grows. This trend matches the intended
long-row regime: increasing the row count mainly changes parallel occupancy, whereas increasing the context
length amplifies the full-row traffic avoided during boundary localization.
Latency is not the only scaling limit at million-token widths. TensorRT-LLM’s GMEM-spill policy handles
candidates that exceed on-chip capacity by reserving 2MN additional 32-bit entries. Because this reservation
follows the full M × N score shape rather than the realized overflow volume, its memory cost grows in
lockstep with the input and eventually causes an out-of-memory failure. HPC-Ops does not rely on a separate
matrix-wide spill allocation. Avoiding this second score-matrix-scale footprint leaves substantially more
device memory available as the row batch and context length grow together.
6.3
Framework-Level Top-K Performance
Framework scheduling determines the sequence of row groups and prefix widths presented to Top-K during a
long-context request. In the vLLM-based execution considered here, query work from prefill and decode is first
organized into bounded scheduler steps. The indexer then partitions each step again to keep its materialized
FP32 score matrix within a fixed workspace budget, so one scheduler step may issue several Top-K invocations.
As the prefix width N grows, the number of rows that fit in one invocation decreases approximately in inverse
proportion to N. The resulting trace therefore moves toward wider rows and smaller row groups over the
course of a request.
The framework replay caps each scheduler step at 64K query tokens. Under this policy, the 245K and 430K
requests span four and seven scheduler steps but generate 26 and 71 Top-K invocations, respectively. We
– 21 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
512
1K
2K
4K
8K
Rows per Top-K call, M
0
2
4
6
Top-K latency (ms)
1.29--1.42× faster
(a) N = 128K columns
512
1K
2K
4K
8K
Rows per Top-K call, M
0
3
6
9
Top-K latency (ms)
1.49--1.53× faster
(b) N = 256K columns
512
1K
2K
4K
8K
Rows per Top-K call, M
0
5
10
15
20
Top-K latency (ms)
1.60--1.72× faster
× TRT failure at 8K
(c) N = 512K columns
512
1K
2K
4K
8K
Rows per Top-K call, M
0
5
10
15
20
25
Top-K latency (ms)
1.68--1.75× faster
× TRT failure at 4K/8K
× FlashInfer inexact at 8K
(d) N = 1M columns
HPC-Ops
SGLang
vLLM best
TRT-LLM best
FlashInfer
PyTorch
Figure 7: Exact Top-K latency on captured causal terminal windows. Each panel fixes the allocated row width
N and sweeps the rows per call M. Every implementation receives the same full-width tensor with invalid
causal suffixes masked to negative infinity. Baseline curves retain the fastest verified exact entry point in each
family at every shape; missing points denote no verified exact result. PyTorch is retained as a masked-dense
reference, with values beyond the shared panel ranges clipped to preserve resolution among the competitive
kernels. HPC-Ops is fastest in all 20 shapes by 1.29–1.75× (1.55× geometric mean).
preserve each invocation’s original M, allocated N, and per-row valid lengths Lr, together with the original
invocation boundaries and order. Every implementation therefore sees the same framework-derived shape
sequence. The timing protocol of section 6.1 is applied throughout each trace, and we report its trace-level
Top-K latency.
HPC-Ops remains exact and fastest for both requests. Compared with SGLang, the fastest external exact
baseline, HPC-Ops reduces trace-level Top-K latency from 77.15 to 56.53 ms at 245K and from 233.50 to
158.12 ms at 430K, yielding speedups of 1.36× and 1.48×, respectively. The vLLM and TensorRT-LLM
paths also remain exact but require more time over both traces, while the exact masked dense paths are slower
still (fig. 8).
The increase from 1.36× at 245K to 1.48× at 430K follows the progression toward wider rows described
above. As a request grows, later chunks account for a larger share of trace-level Top-K latency and place more
of the execution in the wide-row regime, where sampled boundary localization avoids more full-row traffic.
Their growing weight strengthens the trace-level benefit, reaching 1.55× at the terminal 430K prefix.
Score-and-select integration.
We additionally place the selector behind the same DeepGEMM (Zhao et al.,
2025) FP8 MQA score producer and capture both operations in one CUDA graph. Replacing SGLang V2 with
HPC-Ops reduces the Top-K segment from 27.41 to 18.15 ms at 245K and from 38.01 to 24.06 ms at 430K,
corresponding to 1.51× and 1.58×. The complete score-and-select chains fall from 339.99 to 330.84 ms and
from 488.01 to 474.70 ms, saving 9.15 and 13.31 ms. These measurements cover the terminal score-production
and selection chain; model layers outside that chain are not included.
– 22 –


Tencent Hy
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Trace Top-K latency (ms)
HPC-Ops topk
SGLang topk_v2
TRT-LLM decode
TRT-LLM prefill (reread)
TRT-LLM prefill (spill)
vLLM prefill
vLLM decode
FlashInfer top_k
TRT-LLM multi-CTA (c8)
PyTorch topk
56.5  (1.00×)
77.1  (1.36×)
87.6  (1.55×)
87.9  (1.55×)
88.3  (1.56×)
98.6  (1.74×)
199.7  (3.53×)
206.6  (3.65×)
566.7  (10.02×)
866.5  (15.33×)
(a) 245K request
0
1000
2000
3000
Trace Top-K latency (ms)
158.1  (1.00×)
233.5  (1.48×)
264.9  (1.68×)
265.9  (1.68×)
268.8  (1.70×)
292.2  (1.85×)
689.2  (4.36×)
591.1  (3.74×)
1235.5  (7.81×)
2436.2  (15.41×)
(b) 430K request
Figure 8: Exact Top-K latency over the complete framework traces of the 245K and 430K requests. Parenthe-
sized values report latency relative to HPC-Ops. Every implementation receives the same framework-derived
sequence of row shapes and valid lengths.
6.4
Sampled-Path Ablations
Having established the gains at both the operator and framework levels, we next examine how the sampled path
is configured, protected against underfill, and dispatched across row shapes. We first vary the retention margin
ρ and view stride s to select a compact primary proposal, then evaluate how the secondary target absorbs the
remaining underfills. A matched exact-proposal control and an (M, N) sweep finally identify where the gain
comes from and over which row shapes sampling is worthwhile.
The margin, stride, and rescue experiments replay the final scheduler steps of the 245K and 430K traces at their
native invocation boundaries. They preserve every call’s original M, N, Lr, and execution order, and report
step latency as the sum of per-call medians. Recovery rates are aggregated over all rows in the corresponding
step, and every reported variant satisfies eq. (30).
Retention margin.
We first fix the view stride at s = 128 and sweep the requested complete-row rank
eK = ρK from K to 2K. Moving the proposal deeper into the upper tail gives sampling error more room
before underfill, but also retains a larger candidate set for exact refinement.
K
1.25K
1.5K
1.75K
2K
Requested coarse rank, ρK
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Speedup over best baseline (×)
1.51 ×
1.54 ×
selected margin
(a) A moderate margin reaches the plateau
K
1.25K
1.5K
1.75K
2K
Requested coarse rank, ρK
0
10
20
30
40
Fallback rate (%)
34.4
5.66
0.40
35.3
7.84
0.86
≤0.06% fallback
from 1.75K
(b) A small margin collapses fallback
245K context
430K context
Figure 9: Retention-margin ablation on the terminal framework chunks. With s = 128 and the secondary
boundary disabled, panel (a) reports exact speedup over the fastest external baseline and panel (b) reports the
rows entering exact recovery. A target of eK = 1.5K reaches the shared latency knee while keeping primary
recovery below 1%.
At ρ = 1, the proposal has no allowance for estimation error, sending roughly one third of the rows to
exact recovery and erasing the sampled path’s advantage. Increasing the target to 1.25K lowers recovery to
5.7–7.8%, while 1.5K lowers it below 1% and reaches 1.51–1.54× speedup (fig. 9). Deeper targets suppress
– 23 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
the remaining recoveries but retain more candidates on every row, producing a broad latency plateau rather
than a sharper optimum. The 1.5K target therefore supplies a compact tail with sufficient calibration margin
on both traces.
Sampling stride.
We next hold the requested complete-row rank at eK = 1.5K and vary the view stride
s from 16 to 256 under the same primary-only policy. Increasing s reduces the sampled proposal work in
proportion to the view density, but a view that becomes too sparse incurs more exact recovery.
16
32
64
128
256
Sampling stride, s (positions)
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
Speedup over best baseline (×)
1.51 ×
1.54 ×
selected stride
(a) Moderate sparsity reaches the latency knee
16
32
64
128
256
Sampling stride, s (positions)
0
1
2
3
Exact-recovery rate (%)
0.40
2.48
0.86
3.26
≤0.01% exact recovery
through s = 64
(b) Very sparse views increase recovery
245K context
430K context
Figure 10: Sampling-stride ablation at eK = 1.5K on the same terminal framework chunks. Panel (a) reports
exact speedup over the fastest external baseline, and panel (b) reports primary exact recovery. Moderate
sparsity reduces proposal work through s = 128; the higher recovery rate at s = 256 reverses part of the gain.
The denser s = 16 view is almost recovery-free but yields only about 1.05× speedup because proposal
construction still reads a larger fraction of each row. Recovery remains below 0.01% through s = 64, and
s = 128 raises the speedup to 1.51–1.54× while keeping recovery below 0.9%. At s = 256, recovery rises
to 2.48–3.26% and the speedup falls on both traces (fig. 10). The common knee at s = 128 balances the
shrinking proposal view against the growing cost of exact recovery.
Conditional rescue.
Figures 9 and 10 disable the secondary boundary to expose the primary proposal in
isolation. The default policy instead records a secondary complete-row target eK1 = 1.75K alongside the
primary target eK = 1.5K. The same sampled histogram produces the row-local boundaries τ0,r and τ1,r for
these targets. Only a row whose primary count satisfies C(τ0,r) < K scans the intervening band up to τ1,r;
all other rows enter refinement with the original compact frontier. We compare this conditional policy with a
primary-only variant that sends the same underfilled rows directly to exact coarse recovery.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Rows entering exact recovery (%)
245K
430K
0.40%
0.015%
−96%
0.86%
0.060%
−93%
(a) Rescue suppresses exact recovery
0
50
100
150
Mean recovery-path latency (μs)
245K
430K
95.6 μs
37.4 μs
−61%
166.7 μs
63.1 μs
−62%
(b) Coarse rescue is 2.6× faster
Before rescue
After rescue
Full exact recovery
Coarse rescue
Figure 11: Conditional-rescue ablation at s = 128. Panel (a) compares the fraction of rows entering exact
recovery before and after applying the secondary boundary. Panel (b) compares the mean recovery-path latency
of coarse rescue with full exact recovery on affected rows. Conditional rescue resolves 93–96% of primary
misses, while coarse rescue requires 61–62% less recovery-path time than full exact recovery.
The primary boundary underfills 0.40% and 0.86% of rows in the two terminal steps. Conditional rescue
reduces the residual exact-recovery rates to 0.015% and 0.060%, resolving 96% and 93% of those misses,
– 24 –


Tencent Hy
respectively (fig. 11). On the affected rows, coarse rescue reduces mean recovery-path latency from 95.6 to
37.4 µs at 245K and from 166.7 to 63.1 µs at 430K. The secondary boundary therefore protects the compact
primary frontier against rare underestimates without adding a common-path scan.
Mechanism attribution and activation regime.
We compare exact and sampled boundary localization at
the same complete-row target eK = 1.5K while holding the downstream exact selector fixed. The exact control
derives its boundary from the complete row, whereas the sampled path uses an s = 128 view. We then sweep
the allocated row width N from 16K to 64K and evaluate seven row counts M from 64 to 4096 over two
captured score distributions, yielding 14 workload cells at each width. Together, these controls identify both
the source of the common-path gain and the row shapes over which sampling amortizes its fixed overhead.
0
20
40
60
80
Per-row phase latency (μs)
Exact
Sampled
Exact
Sampled
47.5 μs
30.2 μs
245K
74.7 μs
44.7 μs
430K
(a) Sampling removes proposal work
38%
45%
45%
11%
10%
43%
44%
46%
7%
7%
92% of Δ
97% of Δ
16
24
32
40
48
56
64
Allocated row width, N (K)
0.8×
1.0×
1.2×
1.4×
Speedup over exact proposal
0/14 wins
14/14 wins
(b) Sampling pays off as rows grow
s = 64
s = 128
Threshold proposal
Full-row validation
Tail narrowing + refine
Other overhead
Figure 12: Mechanism attribution and sampling crossover. Panel (a) decomposes additive M = 1 active-CTA
phase latency for matched exact- and sampled-proposal controls; brackets report the fraction of their difference
explained by boundary localization. Panel (b) reports the median speedup over exact proposal across 14
workload cells—seven M values over two captures—at each width, with error bars spanning the observed
minimum and maximum. The s = 128 series uses the default dual-boundary policy.
In the additive per-row measurements, sparse localization reduces proposal time from approximately 18 to 2 µs
at 245K and from 33 to 3.5 µs at 430K. The reduction accounts for 92% and 97% of the latency difference,
while full-row validation and exact tail processing remain comparable across the matched controls (fig. 12).
Over the complete terminal steps, replacing the exact proposal with the sampled proposal lowers latency from
32.8 to 18.3 ms and from 43.2 to 24.2 ms, corresponding to 1.79× and 1.78×. Together, these results identify
boundary localization as the dominant source of the complete-step gain.
The width sweep exposes a transition rather than a single universal cutoff. At 16K and 24K, exact proposal
wins all tested cells. Results become mixed from 32K through 56K as row count and capture geometry
determine whether the saved proposal work amortizes sampling. At 64K, both sampled variants win all 14
cells; their median speedups reach 1.13× for s = 64 and 1.22× for the default s = 128 policy. This regime
supports dispatching shorter rows to exact localization while reserving sampling for sufficiently wide rows,
with the transition handled as a range rather than a hard threshold.
7
Related Work
Section 2.2 compares algorithms that accept the same materialized score rows and return exact Top-K indices.
This section considers systems that reduce the surrounding sparse-attention cost by moving selection into
score production, sharing indexing work across queries or layers, or relocating the data and execution substrate.
These approaches change the standalone boundary defined in section 2.1, although several still require token
selection within their resulting pipelines.
Fused and streaming indexer selection.
Fusing selection into score production can eliminate the complete
materialized score matrix. LiteTopK integrates exact Top-K into the indexer and filters candidates as their
scores are produced (Yin et al., 2026); StreamIndex evaluates the indexer in chunks and merges bounded
– 25 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
candidate sets to control the intermediate memory of compressed sparse attention (Jaber & Jaber, 2026). Both
consume query and key representations rather than an already materialized X ∈RM×N. Their optimization
boundary is therefore the fused indexer pipeline rather than the standalone materialized-row operator.
Reusing indexing work.
Another line reduces how often the indexer and selector run. PIVOT scans
the prefix through a proxy for nearby queries, then reuses its result or refines an individual Top-K from its
candidates (Liu et al., 2026). IndexCache shares selected indices across layers that omit their own indexers (Bai
et al., 2026); LongCat combines cross-layer reuse with hierarchical indexing and streaming-aware layouts (Zan
et al., 2026). These methods exploit redundancy outside one score row, while their owner layers, full-indexer
layers, or per-query refinement stages still require candidate selection. Reducing per-selection cost is therefore
complementary to reducing the number of selections.
Alternative memory and execution substrates.
Sparse selection also creates opportunities after indices have
been produced. HiSparse keeps the complete KV history in host memory and resolves selected entries through
a bounded GPU cache while preserving the indexer’s choices (Xie et al., 2026). KARAT instead proposes a
programmable near-memory design for storing index keys and executing scoring, selection, and gathering,
evaluated in simulation (Ham et al., 2026). HiSparse composes with a GPU selector, whereas KARAT replaces
the GPU-resident boundary. Both address capacity and data placement rather than materialized-row selection
cost.
8
Conclusion
Long-context sparse attention creates an exact Top-K regime in which K remains fixed while ragged score
rows grow to hundreds of thousands of elements. HPC-Ops exploits the separation between locating a compact
upper tail and resolving its exact rank boundary. A regular partial view proposes a row-local coarse boundary,
a complete-row pass certifies that proposal and materializes its admitted candidates, and FP32 refinement
resolves only the remaining frontier. Underfilled proposals are detected and recovered before output is
committed, preserving exact Top-K semantics on every path.
HPC-Ops maps this design to persistent and KV-split sampled kernels, complemented by row-local and
cooperative direct-exact kernels for other shapes. On indexer-score captures from Hy4-Preview, this portfolio
is 1.29–1.75× faster than the best verified external exact implementation across the operator matrix, with
a 1.55× geometric-mean speedup. The gain persists over framework-derived long-context traces, reaching
1.36× and 1.48×. Matched controls show that the improvement comes primarily from replacing complete-row
boundary localization with a sparse current-row proposal.
Taken together, these results show that sampling is most useful here as a proposal mechanism rather than an
approximation to Top-K. The sampled boundary controls the amount of work presented to exact refinement,
while complete-row certification determines validity and activates recovery when necessary. This separation
preserves exact Top-K semantics while trading common-path traffic against rare recovery work.
References
Yushi Bai, Qian Dong, Ting Jiang, Xin Lv, Zhengxiao Du, Aohan Zeng, Jie Tang, and Juanzi Li. IndexCache:
Accelerating sparse attention via cross-layer index reuse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12201, 2026. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2603.12201.
Federico Barbero, Álvaro Arroyo, Xiangming Gu, Christos Perivolaropoulos, Michael M. Bronstein, Petar
Veliˇckovi´c, and Razvan Pascanu. Why do LLMs attend to the first token? In The Second Conference on
Language Modeling, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=tu4dFUsW5z.
David R. Bellhouse. Systematic sampling. In Handbook of Statistics, volume 6, pp. 125–145. Elsevier, 1988.
doi: 10.1016/S0169-7161(88)06008-0.
Long Cheng, Ritchie Zhao, Timmy Liu, Mindy Li, Xianjie Qiao, Kefeng Duan, Yu-Jung Chen, Xiaoming
Chen, Bita Darvish Rouhani, and June Yang. Guess-Verify-Refine: Data-aware Top-K for sparse-attention
– 26 –


Tencent Hy
decoding on Blackwell via temporal correlation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.22312, 2026. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2604.22312.
Herbert A. David and Haikady N. Nagaraja. Order Statistics. Wiley, 3rd edition, 2003.
DeepSeek-AI.
DeepSeek-V3.2: Pushing the frontier of open large language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.02556, 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.02556.
Tadeusz Dziarmaga, Witold Sikora, Łukasz Struski, Jacek Tabor, and Marcin Mazur. Prof-K: Probabilistic
one-pass filtering for efficient Top-k selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.12573, 2026. doi: 10.48550/
arXiv.2608.12573.
Anil Gaihre, Da Zheng, Scott Weitze, Lingda Li, Shuaiwen Leon Song, Caiwen Ding, Xiaoye S. Li, and
Hang Liu. Dr. Top-k: Delegate-centric Top-k on GPUs. In Proceedings of the International Conference for
High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pp. 1–14. Association for Computing
Machinery, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3458817.3476141.
Xiangming Gu, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Qian Liu, Fengzhuo Zhang, Cunxiao Du, Ye Wang, and Min Lin.
When attention sink emerges in language models: An empirical view. In The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=78Nn4QJTEN.
Hyungkyu Ham, Junhyeong Bae, Seungheon Lee, Myeongjae Jeon, and Gwangsun Kim. Heterogeneous LLM
serving with general-purpose processing-near-memory for retrieval-based sparse attention. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2608.03555, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2608.03555.
Jaber Jaber and Osama Jaber. StreamIndex: Memory-bounded compressed sparse attention via streaming
Top-k. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.02568, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2605.02568.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with PagedAt-
tention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pp. 611–626. Association
for Computing Machinery, 2023. doi: 10.1145/3600006.3613165.
Yifei Li, Bole Zhou, Jiejing Zhang, Xuechao Wei, Yinghan Li, and Yingda Chen. RadiK: Scalable and
optimized GPU-parallel radix Top-K selection. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM International Conference
on Supercomputing, pp. 537–548. Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3650200.
3656596.
Hong Liu, Yuan Cheng, Lin Niu, Yi Su, Yufei Xue, Anmin Liu, Guanghua Yu, and Jianchen Zhu. PIVOT:
Efficient query-group indexing for token-level sparse attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.24593, 2026.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.24593.
NVIDIA Corporation. CUDA C++ Programming Guide, 2026a. URL https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/
cuda-c-programming-guide/. Accessed 2026-08-31.
NVIDIA Corporation. TensorRT-LLM, 2026b. URL https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM. Accessed
2026-08-31.
Ben O’Neill. The distribution of order statistics under sampling without replacement. Journal of Statistical
Theory and Applications, 24(3):663–698, 2025. doi: 10.1007/s44199-025-00125-y.
Jongseok Park, Sunga Kim, Alvin Cheung, and Ion Stoica. Qrita: High-performance Top-k and Top-p using
pivot-based truncation and selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01518, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.
01518.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Yang, Zachary
DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://
proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Abstract.html.
PyTorch Contributors. CUDA radix selection implementation, 2026. URL https://github.com/pytorch/
pytorch/blob/70d99e9/aten/src/ATen/native/cuda/SortingRadixSelect.cuh. Commit 70d99e9; ac-
cessed 2026-08-31.
– 27 –


Sample-Guided Exact Top-K Selection for Long-Context Sparse Attention
Tobias Ribizel and Hartwig Anzt. Approximate and exact selection on GPUs. In 2019 IEEE International
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW), pp. 471–478. IEEE, 2019. doi:
10.1109/IPDPSW.2019.00088.
Tobias Ribizel and Hartwig Anzt. Parallel selection on GPUs. Parallel Computing, 91:102588, 2020. doi:
10.1016/j.parco.2019.102588.
Anil Shanbhag, Holger Pirk, and Samuel Madden. Efficient Top-K query processing on massively parallel
hardware. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data, pp. 1557–1570.
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3183713.3183735.
Tencent Hy Team. Hy4-Preview model card, 2026. URL https://huggingface.co/tencent/Hy4-preview.
Accessed 2026-08-31.
Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. Efficient streaming language
models with attention sinks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=NG7sS51zVF.
Xi Xie, Yuebo Luo, Hongwu Peng, and Caiwen Ding. RTop-K: Ultra-fast row-wise Top-K selection for neural
network acceleration on GPUs. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PHg4rAXFVH.
Zhiqiang Xie, Zhangheng Huang, Tingwei Huang, Ziyi Xu, Ruiyang Ma, and Christos Kozyrakis. HiS-
parse: Scaling sparse-attention decoding with hierarchical KV cache management.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2608.07009, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2608.07009.
Zihao Ye, Lequn Chen, Ruihang Lai, Wuwei Lin, Yineng Zhang, Stephanie Wang, Tianqi Chen, Baris
Kasikci, Vinod Grover, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Luis Ceze.
FlashInfer: Efficient and customiz-
able attention engine for LLM inference serving.
In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Sys-
tems, volume 7. MLSys, 2025. URL https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper_files/paper/2025/hash/
dbf02b21d77409a2db30e56866a8ab3a-Abstract-Conference.html.
Ziqi Yin, Jianyang Gao, Peiqi Yin, Jiangneng Li, and Gao Cong. LiteTopK: Exploiting the curse of dimension-
ality for a fused Indexer-TopK kernel in long-context sparse attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.11976,
2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.11976.
Z.ai. GLM-5.3 model card, 2026. URL https://huggingface.co/zai-org/GLM-5.3. Accessed 2026-08-31.
Wen Zan, Jiaqi Zhang, Jianchao Tan, Hong Liu, Cunguang Wang, Xiang Li, Duyue Ma, Guanyu Wu, Yifan
Lu, Fengcun Li, Yerui Sun, Peng Pei, Yuchen Xie, and Xunliang Cai. LongCat sparse attention: Taming the
lightning via streaming-aware hierarchical cross-layer indexing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.01662, 2026.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2608.01662.
Jingrong Zhang, Akira Naruse, Xipeng Li, and Yong Wang. Parallel Top-K algorithms on GPU: A compre-
hensive study and new methods. In Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pp. 1–13. Association for Computing Machinery, 2023. doi:
10.1145/3581784.3607062.
Chenggang Zhao, Zhean Xu, Liang Zhao, Jiashi Li, Chenhao Xu, Anyi Xu, Shengyu Liu, Kexing Zhou, and
Kuai Yu. DeepGEMM: Clean and efficient BLAS kernel library on GPU, 2025. URL https://github.
com/deepseek-ai/DeepGEMM. Accessed 2026-08-31.
Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos
Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. SGLang: Efficient execution of
structured language model programs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37,
pp. 62557–62583. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. doi: 10.52202/079017-2000.
– 28 –
